CROW WING COUNTY MASTER GARDENER VOLUNTEER PROGRAM

Baptisia (False Indigo)
Greta Norlander, UMN Extension Crow Wing County Master Gardener Volunteer
Baptisia is a perennial legume and is often an underused garden plant. It is native to eastern North
American prairies, meadows, open woods and along streams. Blue False indigo (common name) was
once used to make blue dye. This long-lived plant grows foot-long spires of colored flowers which
bloom early to mid-spring. The individual flowers are about an inch long, and they last just 2-3 weeks.
It grows in bushy clumps and produces oblong seed pods after flowers drop, shaking the dry pods
produces and sound like a rattlesnake. Deadheading will eliminate the pods weighing down the stems.
However, the big, showy seed pods can be used in dried arrangements. This large, shrub-sized
perennial does well in cottage gardens, meadow plantings and among native restorations. The shape
adds vertical interest, and attractive foliage creates a good backdrop for later blooming perennials.
Type

Perennial

Hardiness Zone

3-9

Sun

Does best in full sun, can tolerate light shade

Bloom Time

April - May

Height

3 - 4’

Spread

3 - 4’ wide when mature

Tolerance

Drought tolerant

Attracts

Several butterfly species

Additional Features

Deer resistant, extensive root system

Soil and Site Recommendations


Drainage: well drained gravelly or sandy soils



Soil pH: does not bloom well in acidic soils

Planting Recommendations


When to plant: early spring (preferably from seed - need cold stratification to improve germination),
may also plant stem cuttings in spring; will not bloom for at least 2 - 3 years



Depth of planting: seeds – ¼”, plants - to cover deep root system



Mulching: none



Spacing: 18 - 36” apart, depending on variety



Spread: 2 - 4’



Division/transplant tips: best not to be disturbed due to deep tap root, may be transplanted in cool
weather if watered regularly initially

[Type here]

Maintenance


Watering: keep well-watered until established, overwatering can cause stems to flop over



Fertilization: does not require much fertilization



Pinching/deadheading: deadhead to keep seed pods from weighing down/flopping over



Annual maintenance: Cut back to ground in fall or winter

Common Problems
Pests: attracts few insects, though weevils can infest the seed pods.
Deer do not favor this plant.

Resources
https://hort.extension.wisc.edu/
https://hgic.clemson.edu/
Questions or problems: “What’s wrong with my plant” for information on garden pests and diseases:
http://apps.extension.umn.edu/garden/diagnose/plant/

Visit us at crowwingmastergardeners.org, on Facebook @CWCMasterGardeners and on
Instagram @cwcmastergardener.

Baptisia Tinctoria

Baptisia Australis

False Indigo, Purple Smoke

© 2020, Regents of the University of Minnesota. University of Minnesota Extension is an equal opportunity educator and employer. In accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act, this publication/material is available in alternative formats upon request. Direct requests to 612-624-0772 or
afnr@umn.edu.

