A Horticulture Information article from the Wisconsin Master Gardener website, posted 5 March 2010

Blue False Indigo, Baptisia australis
Every year the Perennial Plant Association chooses a plant
of the year. For 2010 this is Baptisia australis, or blue false
indigo. This long-lived perennial legume, hardy in zones 3
to 9, has long been a favorite, although underused, garden
plant. Native to eastern North American prairies, meadows,
open woods and along streams, blue false indigo got its
common name because it was once used as a substitute
for true indigo (Indigofera tinctoria, native to southern Asia)
which was used to make blue dye. Other common names
include blue wild indigo, indigo weed, rattleweed, rattlebush
and horse fly weed. B. australis was used medicinally by
Native Americans as a purgative, to treat tooth aches and
nausea, and as an eyewash.
The long-lived
A specimen plant of blue false indigo in bloom. plants grow in
bushy clumps
3-4 feet tall and wide when mature. The trifoliate leaves are
a soft blue-green, alternate and obovate in shape (rounded
but wider towards the apex). The foliage remains attractive
all season until it dies back to the ground in the winter. The
stems should be cut back to the ground in late fall, winter,
or early spring before new shoots appear.
Foot-long, lupine-like spires of blue, pealike flowers are
produced in mid to late spring, about a month after the
leaves emerge. The individual flowers in these terminal Blue false indigo in a prairie in summer.
racemes are about an inch long. The color ranges from pale to intense indigo blue, with white cultivars
as well. Flowering lasts for just 2-3 weeks, and the stems also make a good cut flower. Once the flowers
drop, puffy, oblong seed pods with a sharp tip at the apex develop. They eventually grow 2-3 inches
long, changing from green to charcoal-black when they ripen in late summer or early fall. The mature

Flowers buds emerge in late spring, with the individual, pea-like flowers opening up the spire.

After the flowers fade, pods form if pollinated (C). The rounded, inflated pods (R) have ornamental interest if left
on the plant.

pods contain numerous, loose tan to dark brown, kidney shaped seeds. Shaking the dry pods produces
a sound like a rattlesnake – hence some of the other common names for this plant. The architectural
appearance of the seed pods can lend winter interest, but because of their heavy weight, they often
cause the stems to flop over – deadheading will eliminate this problem, as well as self-seeding. Plants
can be cut back by about 1/3 after bloom or individual stems can e pruned out at the base of the
inflorescence. The big, showy seed pods can be used in dried arrangements.
Because of its large shrub-like size, blue false indigo
works well as a backdrop for other perennials. It can
also make an arresting specimen individually or in
small groups. It is at home in cottage gardens, meadow
plantings and among native restorations. The blooms add
vertical interest, while the attractive foliage is a good foil
for other flowers throughout the summer and fall, and the
seed pods can provide winter interest (if not too heavy
and flopped onto the ground). It makes a reasonable
substitute for lupines in areas where they are difficult to
grow.

Flowers are a purplish-blue.

B. australis is easy
to grow in the right
The shoots of B. australis emerging in spring.
location. It does
best in full sun, although it can tolerate light shade. It does not
flower as profusely and may need staking if shaded. It is tolerant
of most soils as long as they are well-drained, preferring gravelly,
sandy or well-drained loamy soils. The plant does not bloom well
in acidic soils, so adding lime in those conditions can improve
flowering. Keep well-watered until established, after which time
it is drought tolerant. Overwatering may cause the stems to flop
over. Because it can fix nitrogen in the soil like most legumes, it
does not require much fertilization. Deer do not favor this plant,
and it has few other pests. Weevils often infest the seed pods,
however, making the number of viable seeds very low.

Blue false indigo has a deep tap root and extensive root system so
is best left undisturbed. It can, however, be transplanted or divided
in cool weather if kept well watered until re-established. If it needs
to be divided, early spring is the best time before the new shoots
have elongated. The species is easily started from seed, although
the seed needs a minimum of 4 weeks of cold stratification or
scarification for best germination. Seed coats can be scraped with
a file, and/or soaking the seeds in hot water overnight improves
germination. Plants started from seed take 3-4 years to flower.
This species has been used in several Baptisia hybrids, including
‘Purple Smoke’ (B. australis var. minor x B. albescens) and Twilight
The small, kidney bean-shaped seeds.
PrairiebluesTM (Baptisia x variicolor ‘Twilight’, a cross of B. australis
and B. sphaerocarpa). The variety B. australis var. minor (sometimes classified as a separate species,
B. minor), which is only 1-2 feet tall, is sometimes available as a garden plant.
– Susan Mahr, University of Wisconsin - Madison

Additional Information:
Baptisia australis (L.) R. Br. – on Missouri Plants.com at www.missouriplants.com/Bluealt/Baptisia_
australis_page.html
Baptisia australis – on the Missouri Botanic Garden’s Kemper Center for Home Gardening website
at www.mobot.org/GARDENINGHELP/PLANTFINDER/Plant.asp?code=B660
Baptisia - Revenge of the Redneck Lupines – an article by Tony Avent for Horticulture Magazine,
June 2002 at www.plantdelights.com/Tony/baptisia.htm

